[page 1]
Arizona Solar One Abeinsa Engineering 
 
 
Descriptive Memory 
 
Title: 
TES Replacement HEX Operating Philosophy 
Client: Arizona Solar One 
Project: HEX replacement TES Solana 
 
 
Document No. : 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision : 00 
Purpose: IFI 
Date : 23/12/2016 
 
Prepared by: 
Manuel Muñoz Arranz - I&C Engineer 
Pedro Moreira Gomes - Process Engineer Electronic Signature 
 
Reviewed by: 
José Maria Rodriguez León - Project Manager Electro nic Signature 
 
Approved by: 
José Maria Rodriguez León - Project Manager Electro nic Signature 
 
This document is property of Arizona Solar One. Its total or partial reproduction is strictly forbidden by any means, as well as 
its distribution to third parties without the express written consent of Arizona Solar One. 
 
If for exceptional reasons, due to specific aspects of the project (eg: project confidential informati on, legal requirements or 
local regulations and/or contractual requirements o f the client), there was a need to modify the requi rements included in 
this procedure, these changes must be properly docu mented in the quality, environment and health and s afety plan of the 
project, prior approval from the company headquarters management system department. 
 
The original one of this document is approved and filed in document management system application 
 

[page 2]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 2 of 9 
 
Revision Control Sheet 
 
Revision Date Reason for the 
revision 
Prepared 
by 
Reviewed 
by 
Approved 
by 
00 23/12/2016 First edition PMG/MMA JMRL JMRL 
 
 
 
 
Preliminary or pending Information 
Edition Sections Concepts Status 
 
 
 
 
 

[page 3]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 3 of 9 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. 
 Scope of the Engineering Works .......................................................................... 4 
2. Current Situation ................................................................................................... 4 
3. The new technical solution ................................................................................... 4 
4. Modifications to the Molten Salts Circuit ............................................................ 4 
5. Modifications to the HTF Circuit ........................................................................... 6 
6. Operation Philosophy / Operation Modes ........................................................... 7 
 

[page 4]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 4 of 9 
 
1. 
 Scope of the Engineering Works 
A generalized and gradual loss in performance has b een detected in the Thermal 
Energy Storage System (TES) heat exchangers of the Solana parabolic-trough solar 
thermal power plant. This power plant, located in G ila Bend, Arizona (USA), has a 
total installed capacity of 280 MW and six (6) hour s of thermal energy storage by 
molten salt. 
 
For such reason, the plant’s Property has requested the need to conduct a planned 
replacement of all faulty heat exchangers in each o f the storage systems as it 
becomes necessary. Thus keeping the plant’s design installed capacity. 
 
2. 
 Current Situation 
There are 6 (six) Heat Exchangers (HEX) installed o f the plate type, one per pair of 
cold and hot molten salts tank. For all of the six (6) Oil-to-Salts HEX, HTF leakages 
into the MS circuit have been detected and have undergone reparations. 
 
According to the HEX manufacturer the leakages have occurred due to the 
thermal stress suffered by the equipment during its normal operation. The HTF 
leaks into the MS circuit and volatilizes, thus cre ating a gaseous pocket inside the 
equipment and reducing its available heat transfer area. 
 
3. 
 The new technical solution 
The final solution consists of replacing the existing plate type heat exchangers 
(when damaged beyond repairing conditions) by a new HEX. The new equipment 
is of the tube & shell type with a design duty of 419 800 000 BTU/hr (for both the 
charge and discharge operations). 
 
To match the performance of a single decommissioned plate type HEX, a set of 6 
(six) identical heat exchangers working in series is installed. In these HEX the HTF 
circulates on the tube side and the MS on the shell side. 
 
Due to its weight and dimensions, the new HEX cannot be installed on the 
platform. It will be placed out of the TES platform, on the ground level and 
westwards of the decommissioned heat exchanger. 
 
4. 
 Modifications to the Molten Salts Circuit 
The MS inline filters installed on the MS circuit o n the platform are removed and 
from that point new piping is added to connect the cold and hot MS tanks to the 
new equipment. 
 
For the existing control valves or pumps there is no need for replacements. 

[page 5]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 5 of 9 
 
Additionally, because the HEX will be located at a height below the MS tanks MS 
inlet, a drain back tank will be installed inside a pit next to the HEX. 
 
This tank will receive all the MS in the piping cir cuit drained by gravity, which then 
are pumped back into the tanks. The tank’s capacity is not enough to hold the 
whole MS inside the HEX and piping network. Instead, it will work as a buffer tank 
while the drain back pump (installed in the tank) i s working and delivering the MS 
back to the cold MS tank. 
 
Before the highest point in the MS circuit was the HEX itself, and the MS could be 
drained back by gravity back to the hot and cold MS tanks. 
 
Apart from having to install a new MS drainage syst em, another modification to 
the previous installation is the possibility of hav ing “Interchangeability” between 
TES systems. 
 
The Interchangeability concept is the following: 
 
The original plan is that while the existing six (6 ) plate HEX are being 
decommissioned, a new tube & shell HEX is installed as a replacement. 
 
In case that both plate heat exchangers are not av ailable, there is the possibility 
that two TES system share a single HEX. Due to pipi ng restrictions the possible 
combinations are the following: 
 
-
 1 HEX for TES 1 & TES 2 
- 1 HEX for TES 3 & TES 4 
- 1 HEX for TES 5 & TES 6 
 
That is possible by connecting the cold salts and h ot salts tanks outlet lines in a 
common MS header (check Figure 1). 
 

[page 6]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 6 of 9 
 
 
Figure 1: Example of interchangeability where both TES share a single HEX. 
 
Considerations to Interchangeability: 
 
- There is no transfer of MS between crossed TES (e.g . :the salts in TES 1 
cannot be stored in a TES 2 tank) 
 
- The HTF circuit doesn’t needs to be bridged to supp ly hot or cold HTF. 
Because both solar fields are connected to a common header the existing 
HTF circuit is valid for the charge and discharge operation of both TES. 
 
5. 
 Modifications to the HTF Circuit 
Likewise for the MS circuit. The extra piping, requ ired to reach the new HEX, will 
be installed where the existing HTF filters are cur rently installed, on the top of the 
platform. 
 
No new control valves or pumps need to be added or modified. The already 
existing ones are suitable for the new circuit. 
 
As mentioned in the previous section. For the Inter changeability operation the 
existing HTF circuit is valid. 
 

[page 7]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 7 of 9 
 
6. 
 Operation Philosophy / Operation Modes 
Description of the TES four operating procedures 
 
Charge Operation 
The charge operation consists of heating the cold M S using hot HTF from the solar 
field. 
The salts are pumped from the cold MS tank and then sent to a HEX, to be stored 
in the hot MS tanks. 
 
MS Circuit Description 
 
Between normal charge and discharge operations the MS circuit will not be totally 
drained and there will be gases accumulation. 
As a good engineering and operation practice, befor e starting the normal 
operation the circuit must be purged of all gaseous pockets trapped inside it. 
With the new MS circuit, there are two (2) high poi nts in the circuit, located at the 
hot and cold MS jumpers (where the gases shall accu mulate). At these high points 
there are two vents, each with an on/off valve and connected to the cold salts 
tank. 
 
To evacuate these gases and fill the whole MS circu it, the cold salts pump is set to 
a minimum speed and the receiving tank (hot tank) i nlet valve is closed, whilst the 
vent valves are open. The flow of MS should push al l gases. This procedure is 
finished as soon as through the vents there are MS returning to the tank. Once 
there are salts flowing through the vent, the vent valves are closed and the hot salt 
tank inlet valve opened and the system set to automatic mode. 
 
HTF Circuit Description 
Once the MS circuit is filled with liquid the contr ol valve on the hot and cold HTF 
open and the HTF flows to heat the cold MS. 
 

[page 8]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 8 of 9 
 
Shutdown / Stand-by 
MS Circuit Description 
When the receiving tank level (hot or cold) is reac hing its maximum level, the 
running pump starts reducing its speed until is fully stopped. 
 
Once there is no MS flowing through the system both the hot and cold salt tanks 
inlet lines valves open, as well as the vent valves . By doing this it is possible to 
drain all the MS inside the circuits in the platfor m area (before the jumper) back to 
the MS tanks. 
As for the MS circuit section that is at a height b elow the tank inlet height, it will 
remain inside the circuit and kept above its freezi ng temperature with the help of 
the electrical tracing system. 
 
HTF Circuit Description 
As soon as the charge or discharge operation is sto pped the control valves, that 
connect the cold and hot HTF circuits to the TES sy stem, close and the circuit is 
kept “bottled” until a new charge or discharge operation is performed. 
 
Likewise for the MS circuit, to prevent from freezi ng the HTF the electrical tracing 
system is set on. 
 
Discharge Operation 
The same procedure as described for the Charge Oper ation for the HTF and MS 
circuits. But instead of running the cold MS pumps, it is the hot MS pump running. 
 
Drainage 
This operation mode is an exceptional situation for the plant, it should be 
performed only if the installation requires mainten ance works that don’t allow for 
the MS circuit to be filled (e.g.: changes of valves or HEX repairs). 
 
 
 
 

[page 9]
Arizona Solar 
One 
Document: 4521-MEM-AEE-68-10-0001-GAR 
Revision: 00 Date: 23/12/2016 Abeinsa 
Engineering 
Purpose: IFI Page: 9 of 9 
 
MS Circuit Description 
Operator shall ensure that TES tanks pumps are stopped and there is enough spare 
volume at cold MS tank to receive them. 
Open the vent valves at jumpers to drain back tank, to avoid any vacuum inside 
the pipes. 
After that, open drainage valves at HEX system to a llow discharge to drain back 
tank and empty HEX. 
Once level at drain back tank get a fixed set point , the pump inside the drain back 
tank shall start. 
The operation shall continue until a minimum level is reached inside the drain back 
tank, meaning that the MS circuit is drained. The d rain back pump stops as well as 
the MS drainage valves are closed. 
Vent valves are kept open to maintain the circuit blanketed. 
 
HTF Circuit Description 
There is no automatic drainage operation for the HT F circuit. In case the system is 
drained, the procedure is done manually and when th e HTF is cold enough for a 
safe operation.
